# Vertua AI Net
## An Open-Access Community-Trained Model Repository & Code Performance-Validation Network

### Project Description
We propose to build ‘Vertua AI Net’, an open source Substrate-based Polkadot parachain/thread network designed to enable and incentivize:

1. An open community to aggregate computing resources to collectively train advanced AI learning models, and make these community-trained models openly and cheaply accessible to the model consuming public.

1. Validation of proposed changes to trained models as representing performance improvement against previously determined benchmark measurements.

Central to the design of Vertua AI Net is an incentive structure centered around rewarding the on-going contribution of model performance-improvements, rather than on overly taxing access or use of previously trained models. By focusing network rewards on contributions of model improvements, Vertua AI Net yields benefits to model consumers who can e.g. expose community-trained models to the unique datasets generated by their applications, and incentivizes wide-spread use, and as such, large-scale training (potentially much larger than most centralized efforts), of the network’s models. Authors of past adopted model improvements are to be rewarded with each subsequent improvement adopted into the model they previously improved using a parabolic scoring function so that incentive exists to train models early, as well as often.

Core network functionality, such as executing gain-of-function performance validation checks against pre-established benchmarks through participation in the Vertua AI Net’s PoS validation network is to be rewarded on a per-validation basis.

It is our belief that through such a system we can build Vertua AI Net into the clear best-option for training and accessing the world’s most-performant AI models, as well as provide a dual-use as a generic code performance validation resource for e.g. decentralized code test-running and functionality assurance. As such, we believe that Vertua AI Net represents a significant computational and tooling resource for the cross-chain Polkadot community (Polkadot Stack::Chains and Modules::Computation), and decentralized web ecosystem more broadly.

### Team members
* Ethan Stillman
* Donald Frederick, PhD

### Team Website
Project code and documentation to be initially hosted on GitHub at: 
https://github.com/vertua/vertua_ai_net

Our goal is to fully decentralize Vertua AI Net, and aim to decentralized project code storage.

A separate product developed by the Vertua team is currently hosted on our domain at: 
https://vertua.com

We plan to depricate this product in favor of focusing the team’s attention on developing the Vertua AI Net chain specified here, and will host content pertaining to accessing and deploying Vertua AI Net code and services at the vertua.com domain.

### Legal Structure
Vertua Inc is a US (Delaware S-Corp) startup based in the San Francisco Bay Area.

### Team's Experience
**Ethan** most recently designed and built the front- and back-end for a prototype product the Vertua team has been exploring, and which is currently hosted at https://vertua.com. Access to this codebase can be made available upon request; it is a React 16 application with data storage and processing handled through Google’s ‘serverless’ Firebase and Firestore platforms. Previous to this, Ethan pursued cutting-edge R&D as a research fellow at a Mass General Hospital / Harvard Medical School bio lab where he designed a first-of-its-kind state-of-the-art tissue-vascularizing bioreactor for organ engineering, and separately privately pursued R&D efforts in advanced Brain-Computer-Interface hardware, and hybrid bio-digital systems. Ethan began his software career in 2008 building Ruby on Rails applications for contract.

**Donald** has been coding since youth, and has most recently been building data warehousing and machine learning systems for contract. Previous to this, Donald completed a post-doc at the Harvard Institute for Quantitative Social Science where he developed a distributed computing system for conducting a large-scale statistical meta-analysis under the tutelage of COPSS Presidents’ Award-winner (“the Nobel prize for Statistics”), Professor Tyler Vanderweele. Before this, Donald led development of the high-availability computing cluster, and data storage and processing systems for the company Ethan and Donald previously co-founded together. Donald completed his PhD in Psychology at the University of Chicago, and has published in leading neuroscience journals for work developing novel algorithms to process neurological signals he collected, in-vivo, from small animal subjects, which identified composable building blocks for cognition and decision making.

### Team Code Repos
Primary project development to be hosted on GitHub at: 
https://github.com/vertua/vertua_ai_net

### Team LinkedIn Profiles
* https://www.linkedin.com/in/ethanstillman
* https://www.linkedin.com/in/donald-frederick-phd-8a123240/

### Development Roadmap
Our goal with this grant and roadmap is to develop and deploy an open-access community-trained-model repository and code performance-validation network built with Substrate and deployed as a Polkadot parathread testnet. Proposed model updates will be checked by network validator nodes against predetermined per-model benchmarks as a core network function to ensure submitted model updates represent improvement over a model’s current functionality level. In addition to core network functionality, we will populate the network with a selection of AI models to seed the network, develop a web user interface, code documentation, code tests, containerized deployment infrastructure, a project whitepaper, and attempt to recruit an early community of model trainers, consumers, and validation node operators.

The project will take 3 months to complete. It is our goal to continue to build Vertua AI Net after the completion of this roadmap and grant, and build the network into a large-scale decentralized resource for AI model training and open-access high-performance AI models.

#### Milestone 1 - Core Network Functionality & Whitepaper (1 month):
* Build version 0.5 of full-system as stand-alone Substrate-based chain to:
  - Accept IPFS addresses referencing retrievable executables, retrieve referenced executables, and run them in a secured execution environment against pre-determined community-specified benchmark tests to validate if the provided executable reference represents a gain-of-function compared to a specified existing executable. Executables that do represent a gain-of-function are promoted to be the new latest version of the specified model, and network rewards are issued. This work is performed by ‘Validator Nodes’ in a ‘Validator Pool’ proof-of-stake network.
  - Serve IPFS addresses referencing executables for models trained by the network community to protocol consumers.
  - Calculate and distribute network rewards, and perform token minting, in network’s Substrate-based custom Runtime.

* Identify technical challenge areas and potential solutions.
  - E.g. Providing a secure runtime environment, or incentives-based solution for ensuring such security, for running proposed model updates against benchmarks is likely to require R&D.

* Write first draft of whitepaper outlining the full network architecture and incentive structure.

* Write code tests to help assure code functions as intended.

* Write code, and network deployment and operation, documentation.

* Prepare containerization infrastructure to facilitate testnet deployment.

Funding: $10,000 USD

Team: Ethan and Donald will work full-time on this milestone.

#### Milestone 2 - Testnet Beta Launch & Initial Model Seeding (1 month):
* Continue development of core network to version 1.0 addressing any technical R&D challenge areas identified in Milestone 1.

* Test network to assess proper calculation of Substrate weights.

* Launch testnet beta with limited network participation and sudo pallet consensus mechanism.

* Seed network with initial models and benchmarks, and identify technical challenges around doing so for R&D in Milestone 3.
  - We will seek to build community around, and initially seed the network with, high-demand models such as the ‘GPT-3’ model, as well as other more basic but easier to train models.

* Build CLI to network.

* Build basic web application to interface with testnet and provide access to core network functionality.

* Build basic website portal providing access to project code, deployment infrastructure, tutorials, whitepaper, and documentation.

* Iterate draft of whitepaper, and seek feedback from crypto project investors.

* Write code tests to help assure code functions as intended.

* Update code, and network deployment and operation, documentation as necessary.

* Update containerization infrastructure to facilitate testnet deployment as necessary.

Funding: $10,000 USD

Team: Ethan and Donald will work full-time on this milestone.

#### Milestone 3 - Polkadot Integration & Wider Testnet Launch (1 month):
* Address technical challenge areas requiring R&D identified in Milestone 2 from seeding the network with initial models and benchmarks, and iterate core network code as appropriate.

* Integrate network with Polkadot SDK as parathread.

* Open testnet to wider participation and recruit participants for system’s PoS Validation Node network, as well as dedicated model trainers, and model consumers.

* Iterate CLI.

* Iterate web application interface to testnet.
  - Include demo functionality of consuming a model from the network.

* Iterate informational website portal.

* Write development roadmap for bringing the network from testnet to mainnet.

* Iterate draft of whitepaper, and seek feedback from crypto project investors.

* Write code tests to help assure code functions as intended.

* Update code, and network deployment and operation, documentation as necessary.

* Update containerization infrastructure to facilitate testnet deployment as necessary.

Funding: $10,000 USD

Team: Ethan and Donald will work full-time on this milestone.

#### Future Plans
Our core development plans after completing the above items are to continue to improve the system toward a ‘Main Net’ launch and improve integration with the Polkadot Network as a parachain or parathread. The Vertua team is dedicated to growing Vertua AI Net into a world-class decentralized network for training and accessing high-performance AI models, and will seek to use the development momentum provided by this grant to raise additional funding to further support the team’s work ahead of pursuing an expected token offering.

The Vertua team is also committed to extracting useful Substrate pallets or other elements we may develop in the course of building Vertua AI Net for the benefit of the broader Substrate community.

#### Licensing
All code developed as part of this grant will be published under the MIT License.

#### Additional Information
* In addition to applying for this grant, the Vertua team has also applied to the Substrate Builder’s Program and has engaged a small number of venture investors who specialize in backing early-stage crypto network development.

* In addition to AI model training, it is also conceivable that this system may be useful for other on-chain code functionality validation. This could be useful for proving a specified block of code passes a test suite and is safe for some target usage, or otherwise performs to a required standard. This may have applications in advancing the state of decentralized devops, including test running and continuous integration, or other applications we are not currently considering. The Vertua team is open to exploring these additional application areas.

* A question has been raised about the difference between Vertua AI Net and the Ocean Protocol. We believe these two systems serve different purposes; the Ocean Protocol is a marketplace for data whereas Vertua AI Net is a system to incentivize on-going iterative model improvement. We expect, and are likely to encourage, Vertua AI Net models to be transacted on Ocean Protocol, as the more users there are of a Vertua AI Net model, the more compute cycles are being committed to potentially improving that model. We would then expect the Vertua AI Net incentive structure to cause many model improvements derived from these additional training cycles to be submitted back into the network, thereby benefitting all network and model users.

